everyone loves a good villain
and it isn't hard to see why the appeal
lies in their charm
that swagger their confidence
but hope i'm not interrupting these guys
are a little bit different there's a new
guy in town they're obnoxious
they're greedy and they've infiltrated a
generation of movies with their
pomposity
and self-importance the beaches are open
and people are having a wonderful time
i'm talking about mayor larry vaughan
from jaws
i'm talking about the slimy walter peck
from ghostbusters i'm not interested in
your opinion just shut it off
and of course carter burke from aliens
it's pathetic
i'm talking about the infamous cinema
jerk i negotiate million dollar deals
for breakfast i think i can handle this
euro trash
[Applause]
often a corporate administrator or
mid-level jobs worth
the cinema jerk is rarely the big bad of
the adventure yet they're
frequently a dude with the biggest ship
on their shoulder about our hero
i want to know more about what you do
here they're the guy in the suit who is
so happy to stiff our working joe hero
for a small chance of monetary gain
fellas let's
be reasonable huh murray hamilton's
portrayal of mayor larry vaughan in jaws
is still topical now and with good
reason for christ's sake tomorrow's the
4th of july
and we will be open for business he's a
man so obsessed with maintaining the
status quo
by which i mean making his seaside town
remain profitable that even with the
risk of man-eating sharks
he won't close the beaches for the
safety of his own citizens
please feel like going for a little ride
i'd like to show you something the
cinema jerks seemed to epitomize so much
of the decade they were in
when you look at the presidential era of
ronald reagan an era defined by
capitalism
and financial gain we should not be
surprised that so many of these greedy
self-serving cinema jerks seem to appear
here
steve you look like aren't you
feeling any better look at poltergeist
mr teague
and his classes decision to remove the
headstones in order to make way for a
lucrative new development
regardless of the consequences
you left the bodies and you only move
the headstones
you only move the headstone
congratulations bob
thanks there's also bob morton and dick
jones in robocop
two sleazeballs selling the idea of a
militant private police force
and getting drunk off the spoils
and who can forget the ultimate smarmy
blowhard carter birkin aliens
this is so nuts burke is a particularly
overbearing dweeb who revels in
condescending ripley look those two
specimens are worth millions to the
bioweapons division right
now if you're smart we can both come out
of his heroes
and we will be set up for life the
patronizing tone the dismissiveness of
the hero's plight
the arrogance you know i expected more
from you i
thought you'd be smarter than this he's
the perfect misogynist
obstacle a weasley figure in a corporate
position
merrily doing what they can to disregard
and eliminate the more than capable
female adversary
i say we take off and nuke the entire
site for morbid
this installation has a substantial
dollar value attached to it
they can fill me often the cinema jerk
is the real villain of the piece
or at least the human face of villainy
the xenomorph in aliens is a deadly
force of nature
the t-rex in jurassic park is a wonder
of modern science
far worse are the jerks always out for
themselves
and always out to maximize their profits
we can charge anything we want 2 000 a
day 10 000 a day and people will play it
but the key to these cinema jerks is not
only that we love to hate them
it is also that their comeuppance is
always something that feels justified
within the narrative
getting him out of here bye
a sense of justification that satisfies
the audience's moral code
the cinema jerk is all about getting
their way
and then getting hoisted by their own
petard in often immensely satisfying
ways
sometimes we need jerks
[Music]
you